In my frame of reference, they're both speculative fiction.
There's an awful lot of discussion about this. I don't think it's a very
productive kind of a discussion. Practically everything, there certainly is
fiction based upon cold, hard science. There's no question about that. And on
the other hand, there's fiction based upon fairies and wizards. But in general,
most of the stories that you read are all based upon invented laws
of science which aren't in evidence.
And it's kind of a very difficult line of distinction to make here. Now, as far
as I, all this aside, I will say that I start, even though I don't feel that I
say that there's a very thin, if any, boundary between these two things. In
general, I think I start with a mood of a story. Rather than a plot or anything
of the sort, I start with a mood. And then go on and flesh it out and put
characters to the mood and atmosphere and background, stuff like that. And in
this mood, of course, takes account of the fact that the situations are more or
less plausible and possible and credible.
Probably I could state that better by saying that the assumptions are more
familiar. Because given any assumptions, every story starts out with a set of
assumptions which a reader is required to believe in. And with the so-called,
the more closer the stuff is to pure science and the more familiar to the
reader, or not to the reader so much, but the more familiar to the scientific
community is the assumptions. And the closer you get to pure fantasy, then the
more remote are the assumptions made. But the assumptions are there just less,
or there are less. If you don't have these basic assumptions, then you don't
have any story. Now, what was the first part of your question once more? I
answered the last. I forgot what the first part was. Okay, hold on one moment.
Yes, Mr. Vance, I asked how you proceeded from your ideas to a completed story.
Well, I can't answer that. It's because I don't know myself. It's just a matter
of sitting
down and working around an idea and putting, fleshing it out, so to speak. It's
just the same way as if you were painting a landscape. Okay, you'd take a
pencil, maybe you would, maybe you wouldn't, and draw in an outline of a tree in
a house, and then take up the color and start smearing red green for the
foliage, and a circle of smoke coming out of the chimney of the house, and
geraniums in the window boxes. In other words, you start in with a framework and
then start elaborating upon it. That's about the best I can tell you. Does that
suit you, but doesn't it? Oh, yes, very much. We have another second person in
here for a question. All right. I prefer you to only ask one question at a time
so I don't get confused. Okay. Mr. Vance, what method do you use to come up with
the names for your characters and places?
This is a, this is a, I do it very carefully. And it's, it's not in a myth. It
is not just random picking a name out of the phone book at all. What you're
hearing in the background there, there's a gang of birds from cages right over
here. They hear me talking like this. They get annoyed, and they'll start
yelling and screaming, too. You may hear them. I don't know. But anyway, the
names for the characters, they have to be such that they don't intrude on the
reader's notice. Every time he reads them, he says, Oh, that's a strange thing.
What's a strange name with all these odd-looking consonants? The name has to be
such that it'll flow along in the reading and not, not the, not the reader's
tongue won't trip over it every time he gets to it. Still, you don't do it like
it's a comic strip. In a comic strip, the bad guys are always called Ganar or
Nash or something, you know. That's, that's really getting too, too basic. You
don't do it that way. But you do it in more subtle ways. You, you
possibly go back to the roots of the language, roots of either Germanic language
or roots of Latin language. You come up with some kind of, I'm not saying I do
this overtly, but it's a subconscious process. When you kind of write down names
that seem like they will fit this character and, and what he's supposed to do,
what he's supposed to be. Then after you take all these things into
consideration, then you choose what name seems to fit. And as I say, it's not
just an easy matter, although quite often a name will just suddenly pop out and
you know the name is right. But I, in my opinion, it's a pretty important
matter, this nomenclature. It's nothing that it's, if any of you people would be
writers, I think you should pay a good deal of attention to it. Because if you
don't, it detracts, it tracts up the reader when he goes through your story.
It's going to fall all over that name. You know, it's phony. You know, you can't
have phony names in your story. You can't have anything phony. You don't have to
blend in and, there you hear that bird? Hear it? Maybe, maybe not. Well, there's
maybe a difference. Anyway, that's the answer. Okay, very good. I have a
question, but mine's a multiple question. I'm sorry to ask you, but... Well, ask
a part of... I'll just ask a piece at a time. Do you find science fantasy easier
to write than science fiction? What did you say again? Do you find science
fantasy easier to write than science fiction? Well, not particularly. It's all
about the same. Okay. And do you find that you get more, I don't know,
gratification in explaining in science fiction than you would in science fantasy
where you can run away on other aspects of the story? Well, when I was first
starting out, this is the age when science fiction was real science fiction. You
know, when John Campbell ran Astounding Magazine, and he wanted science fiction
to be science fiction. And everybody was kind of slavishly running that route.
And I tried to, and I did some perfectly decent stories along those lines. But I
found that it was kind of tiresome. And a lot of the stories depended on some
little known trick of, oh, like superconductivity.
For instance, I wrote a story once on the idea that sea creatures sequestered
rare elements, rare minerals from the ocean water to build a story in this fact.
But I decided that this wasn't my, I didn't like doing it that way. I wasn't
really interested in writing stories about science. I have a very good
scientific background. I know science. You know, so it's not that I'm ignorant.
But I like to work the science into the stories rather than write the stories
about science, if you see the distinction. So the word science and science
fiction maybe is, well, anyway, as the years went on, I just became, the science
became more cultural, anthropological science, if you want to put it that way.
If there's any science in that at all. All right, what's the second question?
No, you covered everything pretty well. Thank you. That was a very good answer.
Okay, next question.
Okay. Mr. Vance. Speaking. What makes you write? What inside you makes you tick?
Now, that is a very personal question. I don't even see any reason why I should
answer it. Not because I'm shy, but that's a, that's a, well, I could ask the
same of you. What's inside you? What makes you tick? What makes you go to
school?
Why do you study? Why do you survive? I was getting at a question. Let's go on
to another question. Okay. Why do you write? Is it money? I don't want to answer
that question. That's my business. Okay. That's fair enough.
Okay. Next question. Okay. It takes, it takes a moment to filter them in and out
of the room without even getting feedback from the speakerphone system here.
Okay. We got the next guy here. Ready? Mr. Vance, in this story, the sun is red.
And I was wondering how you could have that considering when the sun, when our
sun will be red, the earth will be inside the sun. This is, uh, this is sheer
fantasy here. This is, uh, well, it's not necessarily so because there are dwarf
red stars that are smaller than the current sun here now. Uh, I think the
progression of the sun though, first it gets to be a very large giant red sun
that shrinks. I think that's a sequence. Uh, but still, still in all, uh, these,
these particular stories to which you refer, there, there are essentially
fantasy stories. And the background is magic. I deal with magic in the, in, uh,
the stories. If, if I have to worry about whether or how big the sun is, I might
as well worry about how magic works or worry about any other things. The, uh,
that's just one of the assumptions which we are asked to accept, deal with and
bring the story here is that the earth is so old, the sun is become old and red.
Now, it's may, I'm not absolutely certain whether the sun can become a dwarf red
star if we have to go that route without becoming a giant red star. It may be,
it may be, it may well be that the sun possibly could become a dwarf star. Uh,
although in these stories, I, I generally assume sun is a little larger in
diameter than, than it is now. So, so it wouldn't exactly be a dwarf star. It
would be, uh, but again, this is, uh,
this is just decoration in the story, you might say. It's no, no scientific
justification for it. Anymore, there's scientific justification for, uh, the,
uh, ideas of magic. Next question. Mr. Vance, in your book, The Dying Earth, uh,
what happened to civilization as we know it? Uh, once again, please, louder. In
your book, The Dying Earth, what happened to civilization as we know it? Well,
uh, when? When the sun goes out? Uh, before that. Uh, you start the book off
and, you know, there's the origin of mirror. Don't forget, this is, uh, many,
many billion years according to the story. And there's been many different
civilizations. Up, down, civilizations wiped out. Uh, I, I usually think that,
uh, I, I talk about there being, I, in fact, to tell you the truth, I've, I've
seen an inconsistency. In one of my books, I refer to 43 eons, A-E-O-N-S. In
another one of my books, I only deal with 21 eons. So, I made a blunder there.
I, I forgot what, or how many eons I was using. And an eon is, well, you can
call it anything you like. But, uh, during, during this time span, civilizations
have come and gone a hundred, thousand different times. So, uh, what we have at
this time, at this period, are, are little fragments of life scattered around
the, the, the so-called dying. And that's not my title. I didn't give the book
that title, incidentally. I called it something else. But to tell you the truth,
I've forgotten what I did call it. Uh, but, uh, by and large, the earth of, of
this particular time is kind of a wasteland, where a few isolated, uh,
cities or, or, uh, collections or plots of people still live together for
various reasons. But the, the, the great civilizations are all gone. They're in
the past. This is a, a time when people kind of wander around through the ruins.
That's for this dying earth, particular, uh, maybe your, ambience, atmosphere,
whatever you want to call it. Next question. What happened to mankind as we know
it? Did they waste away or did they, uh, disappear? Uh, well, you read the
books. I think it's all implicit in the books.
Next question. Okay. Okay. In, uh, books like the dying earth, is there any
importance or relevance to the manner in which the characters speak? Uh, one
thing I must say. You're, you're asking a lot of questions about the dying
earth. This story was written long, long, long, long time ago. And I don't know
how old you people are that are asking the questions, but I probably wasn't a
great deal older than you were. I, I presume you're in your twenties. That's my
guess. Uh, I wrote a lot of this stuff while I was a seaman board ship. I was a
deckhand, able seaman. And, uh, for a long time, I couldn't get them published.
And, uh, I had them, I had these things, uh, just on my files, you might say,
for quite a while. But now, these, these things are some of my first written
works. Yes. Now, uh, I, uh, written an enormous amount of stuff since, which,
which, uh, I personally like better than the dying earth. And I think the dying
earth, although many people like these books, and I guess they must have had a
lot of, a lot of color and a lot of drive to them. I've been told this. But, uh,
we seem to be focusing a great deal on the dying earth, which is all right. I
don't mind. Ask all, ask all about who you want. I'll answer you. But the, uh,
there's, uh, uh, just, uh, anyway, there are, I've written other books beside
that. I just want to point this out. Now, this dying earth thing, uh, I forgot
your question. What was your question again? He was just asking a question about
the, uh, the style. It seems to be that the, the people in the book all speak
with the same sort of, um. Yeah. Well, see, now this was a, uh, I, I wrote this
when
I was rather young. And I was trying to achieve a consistency of tone. Now, for
instance, let me put it this way. If you're building a house in Texas, uh,
you're not going to bring down some igloos from, uh, uh, from Alaska or some,
uh, mosques from, uh, from Turkey to put on the property. And you're not going
to have the people that work for you speak in, uh, Yiddish or, uh, Polynesian.
You're all going to be, the, the, the house and the people that live there are
going to be talking in Texas type language. The house is going to be Texas
style. You're going to have Texas style cows. And, uh, eat Texas chili. And I
hope you don't use that hated tomato in your chili because I'm on that, uh, uh,
edge of the, the, the conflict with, believes that tomato is poisonous when it
goes to chili. Uh, in any way I'm trying to say is that the, without being too
facetious here, is that, uh, I tried to make the conversation, uh, consistent
with the, the dialogue consistent with the whole atmosphere. Correct? Anyway,
essentially that's the answer. No more, no less. When I succeeded, that's for
you to say.
Okay, Mr. Vance, let's, uh, before we let you go, I want to ask you a few about
Lioness. Um, one of your later works. Is that okay? Do you have time for a
couple on that? Yeah, ask all night. I'm not doing anything. You're sitting
here. Okay, is it okay if we record this in case, uh, maybe we can get a couple
radio shows out of it and send you the tapes? Would that be okay? Sure, go
ahead. Okay, um, we understand there was a delay in the Underwood Miller edition
coming out. Can you tell us why that was? Yes, I can. It's, uh, it's just not
considered polite for, uh, Putnam, Berkeley Putnam, did not necessarily have to
let, allow Tim Underwood to publish the Lioness at all. See, it's not in my
contract that, that allows Tim Underwood to publish these things. But they
kindly, politely, graciously allowed Tim to publish 500 copies, hardcover. But
they wanted to have their version out first so that the reviews, such as they
were, would specify the book was by Berkeley Putnam rather than Underwood Miller
book. So Tim delayed his publication until the Berkeley Putnam book hit the
stand. It's just a matter of not only courtesy, but it's, and, or good, uh,
consideration, but it's just good, uh, common sense. Because if you don't, if
you didn't play it that way, they'd never allow Tim to, the same privileges
again. In other words, they didn't have to allow him to publish the thing at
all. They just said, go ahead, sure, you know, 500 copies is okay. Okay. So it's
just a, uh, it was just a matter of courtesy, uh, business courtesy between the
two publishers. And Tim agreed to delay his publishing until their book hits the
stand. In other words, there won't be any difference at all in the two editions
then? No, there's no differences. They're the same, the same text. It's just
that, uh,
no, it's just, uh, no differences. It's just that, uh, one is hardcover. It's
got a beautiful, it's got a different cover on it. And, uh, and, uh, it's fine.
I, I, but the text, the same, I didn't write two books, no. No, no way. Okay,
listen, uh, how long have you been planning lionesses? Is that a pretty recent
plan, or did you go way back with that? Well, oddly enough, I had that thing in
my mind ever since I've been 12 years old. And that kind of a story, uh, it
wasn't like lioness, or it wasn't plotted out this way, but, but I had that mood
with the idea of the story taking place in and around this forest. And with
these kind of people, and in fact, I even started writing a, uh, some stories.
There were stories about that when I was just a little kid, 12 years, 14, I
don't know how old I was. They got thrown away. I don't know what happened to
the damn thing. But, uh, then I, really, for telling you the truth, I've just
forgot about it over the years. And then, recently, I decided I'd try a book
along these lines. And, uh, I instantly thought of this construction, or this,
uh, background,
which I developed back when I was, you know, back so long ago. And, uh, that's
where the thing, I won't say it ultimately derives there, because it's certainly
just kind of a notion that all the flesh out of it is recent. But anyway, that's
more or less what happened. I know you have a great deal of, um, maybe not
actual history, but legend, established legend, dealing with the Irish and
English and so forth. How much, in your estimation, was actual history or legend
that you use as a framework? Well, the Irish and the English and the Welsh have,
all in their folklore, speak of these islands off the coast of England, south of
England. They call them High Brazil. H-Y-I-S-I-L-L. High Brazil. And this is,
uh, fairly, uh, I, I haven't read, done all this much reading in the original
sources by any means. But the, uh, it's, it's, it's, it's fairly clear that
these things are just legends without any basis of fact. The, uh, people of,
oceanographers have studied the ocean floor. Out in this area here, they find no
signs of any submerged islands or anything of this sort. They're primarily
looking for Atlantis, which is, of course, Atlantis is much, the site of
Atlantis is much farther to the south. Atlantis is supposed to be off, say, off
Gibraltar. Out near to where, uh, well, there's nothing out there now, but it's
between the Azores and Gibraltar. But, uh, these elder isles would be about
where I've placed them. There's always been these references to Avalon. And, uh,
this, the Lost City East, YS, has been placed, this is more or less for the
French folklore. This has been off the coast of Cornwall, generally speaking.
It's a French literature, but I took some liberty there and I put it on the
other side of the Elder Isles. Uh, Leoness is, uh,
again, Lost Leoness is, uh, the subject, I believe, of, uh, well, I think
Debussy wrote a, I think Debussy wrote a piece called The Sunken Cathedral. The
Sunken Cathedral was supposed to be the cathedral of Lost Leoness City. And that
was supposed to be off Cornwall somewhere. But, uh, there isn't any, any form or
definite references, really, that you could point to and say, here is the
geography. The geography is something which I took some liberties to, mainly on
the basis of these references to the island, High Brazil. and I called, I
removed the L, let's call the island Hybris, which you'll notice in the map.
Yeah, okay, I think I know the answer to this, but maybe if you could clarify
it. The, uh, the witch, I think it's pronounced Desmay, changes into three
things. Melanthi was the first. The third was burned. And I guess the second one
was, was Carfilio, right? Well, there's two, yeah, there's three. There were,
there were three products for, but then, I don't really want to discuss, this is
something you have to read and derive for yourself. This is something that the
author shouldn't have to explain. Uh, but there, there were three products from
that, from the destruction of the witch Desmay. Yes, there were. And if all, as
I recall, it's stated there pretty categorically what happened. I think it was
too. Yeah, no, I think it was too. Okay. Okay, you put book one on the title
page of Leoness. I assume then you have a good deal more material regarding
that. True. I'm just, I'm, I'm, I'm working on it, working on it right now,
matter of fact, but actually I've, not this instrument, I'm kind of assembling
it, but I'm also doing, I'm doing something on, another book at the moment that
I've got a, I've got a contract for and I've got to get out. I've just finished
a, a Kugel book, which is a, I've got a, well called a sequel, if you like, to a
book called Eyes of the Overworld, which is not, again, not my title. I didn't
call it that, but some editor decided that was a good name and they used it. So,
I've finished that. That'll be out in November. Then I've got this thing I've
got to get out. Then after that's out, then I'll do number two. And if, I get, I
get the profit contracts and I'll do number three at the same time, I guess. In
other words, it's all kind of up in the air. I have to wait and see what the
publisher says. Publishers advance. That book was a, a disaster. I don't want
to see Eyes of the Overworld or is it a sequel to the Quest for Symbolists? And
will the Quest for Symbolists, uh, No, that Quest for Symbolists has got nothing
to do with me. Uh, right, but it was Kugel and, um, Well, that's, that's Michael
Shays' book. No, I never even read the thing. No, The, the, uh, the, my, my book
is a sequel to The Original Lies of the Overworld. What's the title of this new
Kugel one going to be? Does it have one yet? Uh, if I'm not mistaken, Dave
Hartwell of Simon & Schuster, I think he's, again, calling it a title I don't
like very much. I think he's calling it The Kugel Sega, S-A-G-A, which I don't
think is a good title with that. Riders don't have an awful lot of clout when it
comes to deciding what the title's going to be, but that'll be the name. S, at
present, that's the name. S, be out in November, as I mentioned. Is it too early
to tell how Leonis is selling? I've heard it's selling pretty good, but, uh, I
don't know exactly how good. I've just heard here and there, you know, that it
seems to be selling pretty good. How does it seem to be selling down your, into
the woods? Yeah, pretty well. We were just at a convention, AggieCon, in College
Station, Texas, and the copies they had there, they sold. The ones that, I
guess, were hot off the press had been sold, and we bought the Underwood Miller
copies here, two of us have. Uh-huh. Listen, I was going to pass along some
information about Mexico. You still going? Well, yeah, I'd sure like to if I
can, if I can get enough time together. I had a friend who was just down there
and he said the, uh, the exchange rate is 148 pesos to a dollar and you'd get
some fantastic bargains and everything. Where did he, where did he exchange at?
At the border or in Mexico? Down in Mexico. I think he went to Chihuahua City
mostly is where he was and he, he did the exchange down there. Uh-huh. But he
said the fantastic bargains, food, lodging, everything. Yeah. So if you go down
there, you ought to have a good time with the money anyhow. Yeah. I'd like to go
down to Chihuahua and take that train over to the coast. You heard, you heard
about that? Yeah, oh yeah, that's, yeah, that's a great trip. Copper Canyon I
think it's called. Yeah, they call it Copper Canyon. Yeah. Well, listen, Mr.
Vance, I'm done with you. I'm going to turn you over to David here. He's got a
favor to ask you, but I appreciate very much your time and we're looking forward
to your future books. Thank you. And just a second now, David wants to ask you
one thing before you go. All right. Okay, Mr. Vance, it doesn't look like we're
going to make it out to any of the cons in the west coast anytime soon and I was
wondering if we, if a few of us here at the radio show might send you some books
in the mail for you to sign and get you to return them if we put return postage
in there. Well, I've had so damn much trouble doing that, you know, that it's
trouble for my wife, really. She's had so much agony going through that, signing
books, taking the post office and then people not sending enough postage that I
just kind of decided I wasn't going to do that anymore. I don't mean to be
churlish about it, but it just makes so god damn much work around here that
this, well, I'll make an exception just once more, but you make sure, damn well
sure you got enough postage, okay? Oh, no problem, we'll send and get all the
return, in other words, I don't mind doing as much if I don't have to squirrel
around and find all the stuff to send it back here. No, we got that down to a
science. You'll just stick the label on, stick the stamps on and dump it back in
the mail. All right, then there's no problem. But I've had time and time again
people send stuff here and it just caused no end to problems. But if you make it
easy, then I don't mind doing it. I certainly don't mind signing your books
late. Okay, no, no, we've done this quite a bit because it's kind of hard. If
you know where we are, we're in the middle of absolutely nowhere. And it's hard
to get out to some cons, so we've found that this works probably easiest for us.
Where is Odessa in connection with, say, El Paso? If you draw a line between El
Paso and Dallas, that line would be nearly 400 miles long. Right in the middle
of that line is Odessa. Because we're just thinking just if we have some friends
in New Mexico, chances are conceivable that we might drive down through El Paso,
down into Chihuahua. Yeah, it's going out through Orores and whatnot. That's a
pretty common route, yeah. Although, I don't know, it's a long, long way. Yeah,
I myself, I've never been to Mexico. I really hadn't thought about it, but with
the exchange rate the way it is, it seems like it would be quite the time. It's
a shame not taking advantage of it. Yeah, I was just thinking the same thing. I
might change my summer vacation plans here. How many people in your class? There
are about 25 people in the class. What are their ages run? Their ages run
anywhere from 18 to the early 30s? Uh-huh, yeah. Yeah, you were pretty right on
the mark on your answer back there when they were asking about the dying earth.
Yeah. Yeah, I hate to talk about that. That seems to be, you know, it's
something that, since was all right, but that's so long ago, you know, I hate to
be wasting all the time talking about that thing, but I've got a lot of other
stuff since then that I think deserves more comment than that thing. But it's
all right, I'm not putting it down, why should I, you know, it made money for
me. Yeah, I think what it is, it's been around for such an amount of time that
it's really getting in the era of being sort of a classic. Yeah, that's right.
You know, kind of like Bradbury's Something Wicked This Way comes, you know,
we've taught them both books and we tend to look at them in the same light.
Yeah, you may just be burdened with having a classic on your hands. Well, as
long as it doesn't cost me money. No, I ought to work the other way around.
Well, no, I'm just joking. Yeah, yeah. Are you going to World Fantasy Con this
next year? No. Okay, I don't go to any conventions unless I get a big red carpet
laid out from here to there with maidens with fans along the way. People offered
me beer at every ten steps and that kind of stuff. If you get offered a con like
that, could you let us know we might just want to come watch? Well, I generally
don't even go to any conventions in the States with exceptions, but I like to go
to foreign conventions because I, you know,
I taken time out to talk with us and everything and the guys in the class really
do appreciate it. Not at all. I'm happy to help you and your work and give me a
call if you have any other problems. Okay, okay, we appreciate it. We'll be in
touch and we'll send those books and we'll make sure to send enough return
postage and everything. All right, very good. Okay, thank you again, sir. Bye
-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye.
Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Bye-bye.